INTERVIEW QUESTIONS:

Primitive data types - includes byte, short, int, long, float, double, boolean 
and char
A primitive data type specifies the size and type of variable values, 
and it has no additional methods.
Primitive number types are divided into two groups:
Integer types stores whole numbers, positive or negative, without decimals. 
Valid types are byte, short, int and long. Which type you should use, 
depends on the numeric value.
Floating Point Types - You should use a floating point type whenever you need 
a number with a decimal - Float,Double
A boolean data type is declared with the boolean keyword 
and can only take the values true or false:
The char data type is used to store a single character. 
The character must be surrounded by single quotes, 
The String data type is used to store a sequence of characters (text). 
String values must be surrounded by double quotes:

Non-Primitive Data Types
Non-primitive data types are called reference types because they refer to objects.

The main difference between primitive and non-primitive data types are:

Primitive types are predefined (already defined) in Java. 
Non-primitive types are created by the programmer
 and is not defined by Java (except for String).
Non-primitive types can be used to call methods to perform certain operations, 
while primitive types cannot.
A primitive type has always a value, while non-primitive types can be null.
A primitive type starts with a lowercase letter, 
while non-primitive types starts with an uppercase letter.
The size of a primitive type depends on the data type, 
while non-primitive types have all the same size.

Array vs ArrayList:

Array: Simple fixed sized arrays that we create in Java
ArrayList : Dynamic sized arrays in Java that implement List interface.
An array is basic functionality provided by Java. 
ArrayList is part of collection framework in Java. 
Therefore array members are accessed using [],
while ArrayList has a set of methods to access elements and modify them.
Array can contain both primitive data types as well as objects of a class depending 
on the definition of the array. 
ArrayList only supports object entries, not the primitive data types.
ArrayList supports many additional operations like indexOf(), remove(), etc.
These functions are not supported by Arrays.

RECURSION:

The process in which a function calls itself directly or indirectly is called recursion 
and the corresponding function is called as recursive function.
A function fun is called direct recursive if it calls the same function fun. 
A function fun is called indirect recursive if it calls another function say fun_new 
and fun_new calls fun directly or indirectly.
The idea is to represent a problem in terms of one or more smaller problems, 
and add one or more base conditions that stop the recursion.
If the base case is not reached or not defined, then the stack overflow problem may arise.
When any function is called from main(), the memory is allocated to it on the stack. 
A recursive function calls itself, 
the memory for the called function is allocated on top of memory 
allocated to calling function 
and different copy of local variables is created for each function call. 
When the base case is reached, 
the function returns its value to the function by whom it is called
 and memory is de-allocated and the process continues. 

GARBAGE COLLECTION:

Java garbage collection is the process by which Java programs perform automatic memory 
management.
Java programs compile to bytecode that can be run on a Java Virtual Machine
When Java programs run on the JVM, objects are created on the heap,
 which is a portion of memory dedicated to the program. 
Eventually, some objects will no longer be needed. 
The garbage collector finds these unused objects and deletes them to free up memory.
Java garbage collection is an automatic process. 
The programmer does not need to explicitly mark objects to be deleted.
The garbage collection implementation lives in the JVM. 

LIST:

List: The List is a child interface of Collection. 
It is an ordered collection of objects in which duplicate values can be stored. 
Since List preserves the insertion order,
 it allows positional access and insertion of elements. 
List interface is implemented by the classes of ArrayList, LinkedList, Vector and Stack. 
List is an interface, 
and the instances of List can be created by implementing various classes.

ARRAY LIST:

ArrayList is a part of collection framework and is present in java.util package. 
It provides us with dynamic arrays in Java. 
This class implements the List interface. 
Similar to a List, 
the size of the ArrayList is increased automatically if the collection grows 
or shrinks if the objects are removed from the collection. 
Java ArrayList allows us to randomly access the list. 
ArrayList can not be used for primitive types, like int, char, etc. 
We need a wrapper class for such cases.

LINKED LIST:

Linked List is a part of the Collection framework present in java.util package. 
This class is an implementation of the LinkedList data structure 
which is a linear data structure where the elements are not stored in contiguous locations 
and every element is a separate object with a data part and address part. 
The elements are linked using pointers and addresses. 
Each element is known as a node. 
Due to the dynamicity and ease of insertions and deletions, 
they are preferred over the arrays. 
It also has few disadvantages like the nodes cannot be accessed directly 
instead we need to start from the head 
and follow through the link to reach to a node we wish to access.

VECTOR:

The Vector class implements a growable array of objects. 
Vectors basically fall in legacy classes but now it is fully compatible with collections. 
It is found in the java.util package and implements the List interface, 
so we can use all the methods of List interface here.
Vector implements a dynamic array that means it can grow or shrink as required. 
Like an array, it contains components that can be accessed using an integer index
They are very similar to ArrayList 
but Vector is synchronized 
and has some legacy method that the collection framework does not contain.

STACK:

Java Collection framework provides a Stack class that models 
and implements a Stack data structure. 
The class is based on the basic principle of last-in-first-out. 
In addition to the basic push and pop operations, 
the class provides three more functions of empty, search, and peek. 
The class can also be said to extend Vector
 and treats the class as a stack with the five mentioned functions. 
The class can also be referred to as the subclass of Vector.
All Implemented Interfaces:Serializable,Cloneable,Iterable,Collection,List,RandomAccess.

QUEUE:

java.util.Queue interface.
The Queue is designed to hold elements prior to their processing. 
Some can be of a fixed capacity, 
meaning they can contain only up to a certain number of elements.
So, the idea is to push some elements into a Queue, and then retrieve them afterwards. 
Generally, queues are returning elements respecting the First-In First-Out (FIFO) pattern, 
meaning the oldest element of the queue is returned first, then the oldest after that, etc.
But there can be other implementations which respect the Last-In First-Out (LIFO) pattern.
We'll begin by adding an element to a Queue. 
First, let's instantiate one using the ArrayDeque implementation, 
which also implements the Deque interface.
In order to add an element in this Queue, we have two possibilities: 
the add() method or the offer() method.
Both return a boolean value indicating if the element was added to the Queue or not, 
according to its capacity (if it applies),
the first will in fact never return false, 
rather throwing an Exception when adding an element to a full Queue. 
On the other hand, the second one will return false in such cases.
Instead of ArrayDeque, which is unbounded, 
let's use the LinkedBlockingQueue which can be assigned a capacity.
classes that implements the Queue interface is
ArrayDeque,LinkedList,DelayQueue,PriorityQueue.

DEQUE:

Deque stands for Double Ended Queue, 
which means this is a queue that can be accessed by both ends,
and therefore can be used with both FIFO and LIFO styles. 
By default, it organizes its element LIFO style,
 meaning that getting the first in the Deque would return the last that had been added.
No Exception	offerFirst()	offer(), offerLast()
Exception	addFirst(), push()	add(), addLast()
No Exception	peek(), peekFirst()	poll(), pollFirst()
Exception	getFirst(), element()	remove(), removeFirst(), pop()
No Exception	peekLast()	pollLast()
Exception	getLast()	removeLast()
As for the Queue, we can iterate using the standard mechanisms and the forEach() method. 
We just have to remember that, by default, 
the Deque organizes its elements LIFO style and therefore will iterate on them, 
top to bottom.


Definition of OOP Concepts in Java:

They are an abstraction, encapsulation, inheritance, and polymorphism.

Abstraction means using simple things to represent complexity.
simple things like objects, classes, 
and variables represent more complex underlying code and data. 
This is important because it lets avoid repeating the same work multiple times.

Encapsulation. This is the practice of keeping fields within a class private, 
then providing access to them via public methods. 
It’s a protective barrier that keeps the data and code safe within the class itself. 
This way, we can re-use objects like code components 
or variables without allowing open access to the data system-wide.

Inheritance. This is a special feature of Object Oriented Programming in Java. 
It lets programmers create new classes 
that share some of the attributes of existing classes. 

Polymorphism. This Java OOP concept lets 
we use the same word to mean different things in different contexts. 
One form of polymorphism in Java is method overloading. 
That’s when different meanings are implied by the code itself. 
The other form is method overriding. 
That’s when the different meanings are implied by the values of the supplied variables.

In Java, an object is created from a class. We have already created the class , 
so now we can use this to create objects.
A class should always start with an uppercase first letter, 
and that the name of the java file should match the class name.

SOLID:
Single Responsibility principle.
The single-responsibility principle (SRP) is a computer-programming principle that states that every module,
class or function in a computer program should have responsibility over a single part of that program's
functionality, and it should encapsulate that part.

Open/Closed principle.
In object-oriented programming, the open–closed principle states "software entities
(classes, modules, functions, etc.) should be open for extension, but closed for modification";
that is, such an entity can allow its behaviour to be extended without modifying its source code.

Liskov Substitution principle.
The principle defines that objects of a superclass shall be replaceable with objects of its subclasses
without breaking the application.
That requires the objects of your subclasses to behave in the same way as the objects of your superclass.

Interface Segregation principle.
In the field of software engineering, the interface-segregation principle (ISP)
states that no client should be forced to depend on methods it does not use.

Dependency Inversion principle.
The principle states: High-level modules should not depend on low-level modules.
Both should depend on abstractions (e.g., interfaces). Abstractions should not depend on details.

TEST DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT: Test First approach
Test-driven development (TDD)

DESIGN PATTERNS:
Types of Design Patterns

Creational-Deal with initialization and configuration of classes and objects
-Singleton Pattern: A Singleton class is supposed to have only one instance
-Prototype Pattern: Create new objects by copying this prototype
-Builder Pattern: Same construction process can create different representations

Structural-Describe ways to assemble objects to implement a new functionality
-Facade Pattern: Defines a higher-level interface that makes the subsystem easier to use
-Composite Pattern: Allows to combine different types of objects in tree structures

Behavioral-Deal with dynamic interactions among societies of classes
-Command Pattern: An object encapsulates all the information needed to call a method at a later time
-Template Pattern: Define the skeleton of an algorithm in a method,leaving some implementation to its subclasses

OVERRIDE:
Ability to define a behavior that's specific to the subclass type,
which means a subclass can implement a parent class method and then to modify behavior as needed.
The overriding method has the same name, number and type of parameters,
and return type as the method that it overrides.
Method overriding is one of the way by which java achieve Run Time Polymorphism.

OVERLOAD:
In Java, two or more methods may have the same name but different number of parameters,
different types of parameters, or both.

ALGORITHMS:
Algorithms in Java are static methods that can be used to perform various operations on collections.
Since algorithms can be used on various collections, these are also known as generic algorithms.

POJO:
Plain Old Java Object.
It is an ordinary Java object,
not bound by any special restriction other than those forced by the Java Language Specification
and not requiring any classpath.

FILO:
A Stack is a Last In First Out (LIFO) data structure.

FIFO:
First In, First Out (Queues are based on the FIFO principle).